[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is "Book Tours"
and I'm Corinne Edwards.
I'd like you to meet one of the
most important new messengers
in publishing today.
Important because the
authors on this show
are dedicated to helping
your personal growth,
make you happier, healthier,
to be the best you can be.
We are thrilled here
at Wisdom Television
to welcome back Marianne
Williamson and her book
"Enchanted Love the
Mystical Power of Intimate
Relationships."
It is seldom that
after I finish a book--
and you can imagine that
I read a lot of books--
that I go to my computer and
send an email to everyone
I know to stop what they're
doing and read this book.
"Enchanted Love" is enchanting.
It is poetry, wisdom.
And it is practical.
It's always such a pleasure
to have you on board.
>> Thank you so much.
Thank you, Corinne.
>> I want to talk about the most
practical chapter in the book--
>> Yeah.
>> Which is Chapter 6.
And you call it Grown Up Love.
>> Grown Ups in Love, yeah.
>> You know, it's wonderful to
talk about the theory of love,
but this chapter actually
gets down to beyond or before
the spiritual to what mainly
makes people tick and what do
they want.
>> In that chapter, I quote
a woman whose lectures I used
to hear a lot in Los Angeles
named Pat Allen, Dr. Pat Allen.
She's a psychotherapist
and an author.
And a lot of her work is based
on the theories of Carl Jung.
And she said a few
things that really
affected me deeply in my life.
And one was that she claims
that a man's greatest psychic
need is to have his
thoughts respected.
And a woman's
greatest psychic need
is to have her
feelings cherished.
And I think
sometimes women focus
on what we think more
than focus on how we feel.
And also I think
sometimes we ask men
how they feel more
than what they think
in ways that set all
of us up for behavior
and experience that is less than
the most that we're capable of.
So I deal with that theory
of hers in that chapter.
>> You said that was
a revelation for you.
>> It was a bit of
a revelation for me,
because I'm very much
of the generation--
I became what in
Carl Jung theories is
called the father's daughter.
What that means is this--
what Pat Allen suggests
is that when my generation
was around puberty,
our parents made
some big mistakes
in a psychological sense
with the best of intentions.
And that is that
just as young men
used to go-- and still in
some Indigenous cultures
go through puberty rites.
Even today, the bar
mitzvah is basically
a puberty right where there is
a ceremonial and ritualistic
transformation from
boyhood to manhood.
And basically, just
as in the bar mitzvah,
the real communication to
the community, to the boy,
to his mother is that
he is a boy no longer.
He is now a man.
And the psychological
imperative there for the mother
is to stop coddling his
feelings and to start
respecting his choices, showing
respect for his choices.
Now in our generation, a
lot of that went backwards.
And women thought that they
were doing the right thing
helping men stay in touch with
their feminine by coddling
an adolescent boy and older,
coddling his feelings.
>> Cutting him too much slack?
>> In a way, yes.
And fathers, often with
the best of intentions,
made the opposite mistake
with their daughters.
So that we would come home
at adolescence, at puberty,
having made an A plus in--
I don't know--
something like science.
And so the father, once again
with the best of intentions,
slaps us on the
back and says, you
can do as good as any boy can.
Now, we got some really
unfortunate messages there.
The girl, in that case, has
led to believe that achieving
something, achieving more--
if I only achieve more--
that will gain me love
from the men in my life.
And many of us learned,
very painfully,
that that's simply not true.
So what started to happen
was this really neurotic
interaction between
grown men and women,
really stuck at adolescence,
with the message of the man
tending to be my mother
still loved me when I acted
like an idiot, why don't you?
And the response is because
I'm not your mother.
>> You said--
>> Excuse me, just a moment.
And then the message to
the man from the woman
is my father loved me when I
achieved more and more, why
doesn't that earn your love?
And the response is because
I'm not your father.
So we have to make a leap
across that great divide
to become women who respect
the man for his decisions
and his choices and to love
a woman for her feelings
and to put behind us that more
immature interaction where
we got stuck, really, in the
dynamic with our parents.
So thank you for
letting me just complete
the other side of that.
I'm sorry.
>> No, I think it's a very
important thought because I
also was brought up
along those lines.
You can do anything.
>> Yeah, which we can.
And it's not like we
want to go backwards.
>> And you're never suggesting
not to do everything.
>> Oh, absolutely not.
>> But that's not what
gets the man's attention.
>> Well, what I'm suggesting
is that the psychological
dynamic--
you're a woman in the workplace.
I'm a woman in the workplace.
There's a certain
psychological dynamic
which is appropriate here
and which is valid here.
But it's basically
a masculine dynamic.
And I think all men and women
are masculine and feminine.
So I'm glad that you
and I have a chance
to experience our masculine
dynamic, going out, doing,
achieving.
Just as it's wonderful
for men to be
in touch with their
feelings and experience
their feminine dynamic
that they can be passive
and they can be receptive.
However, let's be really
clear when it comes--
well, not only in
heterosexual relationships,
because I think this
dynamic is the same even
in gay relationships-- when
it comes to romantic love,
it's a different dynamic.
So the same psychological
dynamic that makes you
and me, in some cases,
successful in our careers,
if we want to be successful
in romantic relationships,
we have to move into a
different part of the brain
into a different
part of the soul.
You know, and that
makes it sense.
There's yin and yang.
There's the active
and the passive.
There's the masculine
and the feminine.
And they're different.
And that's good.
Those are two
parts of ourselves.
>> So women have been attracting
these men who are still
mama's boys, who seem to want
to express their feelings all
the time.
And they're attracted
to us because we
seem to be pretty
powerful and achievers.
>> Sometimes that's
one of the ways.
>> We get bored with them,
because we really want a man.
>> Yes, that's right.
>> We've forgotten our genetic
imprinting, haven't we?
>> Well, I think there's
some genetic imprinting here.
And we need to be so
careful because we
don't want to sound retro and
we don't want a sound backlash.
And we don't want to--
>> You can do anything
you want on this show.
>> No, I really do want to.
I mean I think it's important
not to be suggesting that we're
supposed to go back 30 or
40 years because that's not
what I'm saying.
I'm simply saying that there
is a way in which, I think,
men with the men's
movement, for instance,
now are realizing
that, yes, they
got in touch with
their feminine,
but sometimes at the
expense of their masculine.
And you and I got in
touch with our masculine,
but sometimes at the
expense of our feminine.
And it's just a balancing
that's occurring right now.
Once again, we don't want
to give up the strides,
but we want to move into a
space of honoring the mystery,
for instance.
I think that we have
demystified love
in the name of mental health.
You know, love is a mystery.
And it's very fragile.
And you can't define
it all the time.
You know, Goethe once said
to analyze is to murder.
There is a way in which the
deepest experience of romance,
it's a mystery.
It's not something that you
can just set up a formula
and then you'll have it.
What you can do is
set up a temple.
What you can do is create
fertile ground, fertile ground
for that mystery to unfold.
And then if it does, you can
honor it and you can tend it.
And if it doesn't,
you can realize
that even it's not being there,
it's part of a sacred journey
so that at least you're asking
the right questions that
will lead you back to it.
That's what I'm saying.
I'm saying that the masculine
mind is the externally focused
mind in men and in women.
That has a part to
play, but it's only half
of the creative existence.
And it's not the part of
the mind that can really
earn us love or tend to love.
>> The part of the mind that
earns its love for a woman is
a man who is a man.
And yet, we have been, somehow--
been, somehow we've gotten
drafted, in many cases,
in becoming a man's mother.
And it hasn't worked, because
it's really not what we want.
>> It's not what we want.
And at the deepest level,
it's not what they want.
A lot of times women
will say, he left me
after I did so much for him.
And sometimes the problem was
that we did too much for him.
If you're to be a man's
lover or a man's wife,
you're not his mother.
And you're not his teacher.
>> That was another point.
>> And if you mother a
man or become his teacher,
what that does is cancel out
his sexual attraction to you.
Because a man's
brain is not set up--
he's not supposed to go
into sexual attraction
towards his mother.
There is a deep,
deep taboo there.
>> Or his teacher.
>> Right, except in the
dysfunctional oedipal sense.
So this idea that we're
not doing it for a man.
Now, sometimes women
will say-- and what
we deal with in the book--
is that woman will say, well,
if I don't, you
know, do it for him,
he won't step up to the plate.
And the issue there
is if he doesn't
know how to step
up to the plate,
then he's not the man for you.
And ultimately the issue
is-- and then you say,
but I know he loves me.
The bottom line in love
is not whether or not
they love you but whether
or not they choose you.
>> Say that one more time,
because I think that's one
of the most important things
you say in that chapter.
>> The bottom line in love is
not whether someone loves you--
I mean, we've all
been in love affairs
where somebody loved us but
it's still ended tragically
or we loved them and it
still ended tragically.
The issue, the
bottom line issue,
is not whether someone loves
you but whether they choose you.
Real love, the deepest romantic
love, is an adult decision.
And it's an adult
choice that we make
to show up for this experience
even when I'm not in the mood,
to focus on your innocence,
even when your guilt seems
so obvious to me, to
focus on who you can be
rather than who you've been.
It's a very adult, adult
game, a very adult dance.
>> We've been dancing here
today, really dancing,
with Marianne Williamson about
her book "Enchanted Love:
The Mystical Power of
Intimate Relationships."
Stay with us.
We'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We've been talking to
Marianne Williamson
today about her beautiful
new book, "Enchanted Love:
The Mystical Power of
Intimate Relationships."
And we're into
practical things--
what men are really like.
What does a man want today?
>> Well, I'm not a man so
I can't really answer that
question perhaps, but I do
know this, that I know--
and of course here we're talking
about the heterosexual dynamic,
although as I said
before, the same is
true in gay
relationships, I believe--
I think in a
heterosexual dynamic,
I think that it's
important for us
to realize that a man shows
up as a man most fully
in the presence of a woman who's
really showing up as a woman.
And I think a woman
shows up as a woman
most in the presence
of a man who's
really showing up as a man.
So that means that on the
deepest level what we really
want from each other is
for you to be yourself,
for you to be yourself.
I think that goes
back to this business
don't think about
what you're doing
for him in the sense of his side
of the net in the relationship.
How can you be the woman that
is yourself, the most glorious?
And how can a man be
the man that he can be?
Once again, that's why
I'm a fan of things
like the men's movement.
I think something really
good is in the air that way.
And I think the rest of
life takes care of itself.
If you take care of who you
are and how you want to show up
in the world, not
with a sense of need,
or a sense of somebody else, or
something else completing you,
but in the fullness
of who you are,
and that fullness cannot
be achieved with--
I believe-- without
spirit, without God.
When that kind of love--
whether we call it God or not--
when a power higher than we are
becomes the overriding purpose,
and mission, and identity that
we relate to in our lives,
we become full.
And then other people
and other situations
will be automatically
attracted to you.
So you don't have to think
about what does a man want.
Think about what you want to be.
And by definition, that
will be what some man wants.
>> Yeah.
Do you tell a man what you want?
>> Well, if he asks.
>> Um-hmm.
And the other thing you
say is when he tells you
what he wants, believe him.
>> Oh, that's a really big
one for women, isn't it?
Yes, men-- I quote in
there a friend of mine who
said, "Most men want love
as a vacation and women
want it as a lifestyle."
I don't know if that's
true of all men,
but I do think that
women often overestimate
kind of what a man's commitment
is in a relationship,
because we never
really asked him.
And usually they
don't lie unless we've
proven with our behavior that
we get hysterical if they do.
>> And do women lie?
>> I don't know.
I wouldn't say that women do
lie, but I would say that--
I don't know, I won't comment.
I mean, listen
there are millions
of women, billions of women.
But I think in general, in
terms of male psychology,
there is a level on which
women tend to ignore
what a man actually told us.
Because he often will say
I'm just looking for fun here
and we think that the
relationship is so intense
and the sex is so amazing that
he didn't really mean that
or I can change his mind.
And that leads to a lot of pain.
It's best, number one, to
believe a man when he tells you
he's not in it for any
more than just some fun.
And number two, to ask him
before you allow your heart
to get involved and, certainly,
before you allow your body
to get involved.
Because once your
body gets involved,
your heart's going
to get involved.
That's a genetic fact.
There are literally chemicals
emitted by the brain
as soon as there's a
sexual interaction.
And so for us to
over casualize has
been a tragedy in many cases,
physically, emotionally.
>> So we're giving too
much too soon sexually?
>> I think.
I mean that like,
duh, these days.
I mean people get that now.
To jump in just to those
deep waters before we've
really established what's
the magic factor here
and what's the commitment here.
You know, are we really in this
for something deep, and sacred,
and important or is this
just a weekend of fun?
Because a woman who really
values herself deeply,
if that's all it is, we save up
for a much more important, much
more important relationship.
>> What about a man?
>> Listen, I think
these days it's men,
every bit as often as women,
who say I'm not going to do this
because I'm past that kind of
superficial level of sexual
relationship.
Absolutely, it's the
same for men as women.
>> You said in the book that
one of the biggest pains in love
relationships is you've given
your heart to somebody who
never wanted it in
the first place.
>> And would have told you
that if you bothered to ask.
>> And would have told you.
>> And maybe he told you and
you just didn't believe it.
But these are the lessons
you live long enough,
you learn them.
And that's one of
the things that's
so exciting about being
at a certain age where
it's, like, you've been
through enough of that.
You get to a point
in your life where
you've heard so many
people's romantic stories
and you can relate to
them because you've
played every character.
You've been the one who left.
You've been the
one who got left.
You've been the one
who was an idiot.
who wasn't the idiot.
You know what I'm saying?
You've done it all.
And then you're really ready.
You're at a level of your
life has chastened you.
But on the other
hand, at that point,
we often are
carrying these scars.
So I think that love
can be, in the best
sense of the word,
a kind of hospital
for each other's broken
spirits and broken souls.
And that's, to me, the meaning
of Isis lifting or Osiris
from the dead.
That's the meaning to
me of Mary Magdalene
asking for Jesus's dead
body and being the first one
to see him on the road.
Not his mother, not
his male disciples,
it was Mary Magdalene who saw
the resurrected body first
because she was
in love with him.
I think that someone who deeply
loves you has the capacity
to repair you, not in a neurotic
sense of enabling and doing it
for you, but in the sense that
if I see the perfect in you
that becomes a vision
that then impels
you to rise to that level.
That's the greatest gift
we can give to each other.
That is to see the
best in each other.
I see the beauty in you.
I can't make you beautiful, but
I can see the beauty in you.
I can't make you brilliant, but
I can see the brilliant in you.
It goes much deeper than
trying to convince you of it.
I see it.
And if I see it, then my
behavior will reflect that.
And then my whole
presence in your life
becomes a space in which you're
more likely to grow into it.
And in that sense, we give
rebirth to each other.
And then that makes romance
a kind of psychic womb
for the emergence of ourselves
at the next highest place.
This is a huge cosmic
phenomenon here.
This is a planetary repair.
This is a fundamental
quantum leap
forward for men and for women.
And that's who we
need to give birth
to now, not just new babies,
but new beings within ourselves.
That's what's going
to save the world.
That's what nature needs
from us, not necessarily more
babies, but more wisdom.
>> I liked the way you treated
the person who feels as though
they've been wronged in a
relationship in your book.
>> Give me an example,
because I don't know exactly--
>> You were talking about a
woman who has been abandoned
by a man or a man who has been
abandoned by a woman and how
to view that in the
larger, metaphysical sense.
>> You know at the lectures
that I've been doing around
the country on this book,
I've been ending the lectures,
often, with the men standing
up and apologizing prayerfully
to the women and the women
standing up and apologizing
prayerfully to the men.
Why don't we have a truce?
Why don't we have amnesty
between the sexes?
Why don't we just
cancel the debt?
Everybody's been hurt.
Men have hurt women.
Women have hurt men.
We've been abandoned.
And we've abandoned.
Let's just do this huge
group, "I'm really sorry.
I didn't mean to hurt you."
That's the only way we can
go on, because otherwise I
have abandonment issues.
I'm expecting you to cater
to my abandonment issues
even though you're not
the one who abandoned me.
My father was the
one who abandoned me.
And we're stuck in this.
Why don't we just start over?
And what that means is that I
don't want to be stuck forever
in this "my abandonment issue."
And I can realize
that if you left,
you weren't necessarily
abandoning me,
you were just
turning the corner.
It wasn't an against me.
It was a for something that
you felt was your next step.
So I have a choice here.
I can either see this
as an abandonment
or see it in its higher context
which is you met another choice
and I can respect you for that.
And if it was the right
choice for you, then it was,
ultimately, I will see
the right choice for me.
And if it wasn't the right
choice for you or for me,
God's still bigger
than your choices.
So I'm not going to
lose out ultimately,
because if there's a
level of love here we
could have exchanged and
you chose not to experience
with me, somebody else
will because that's where
my consciousness is right now.
So I have a choice.
I don't have to stay in this
rather neurotic and low level
abandonment issue stuff forever.
I can move on to a more glorious
sense of myself and of love.
That's what I've
come to believe.
>> One of your famous quotes--
and you used it before
in your last book.
And it is "If the train
doesn't stop at your station,
it's not your train."
>> I did.
I used that again in
this book, as I had,
I think, in "Return to
Love" because so many women
and men, I think,
relate to that.
And that's where I've said
to women, particularly,
but it's true for men,
if the train doesn't
stop at your station, it's
because it's not your train.
We hold on to
relationships that aren't
blooming, aren't working.
And sometimes, it's because
the conductor of that train
is right.
His intuition or her intuition
is saying don't stop here.
But our intensity is
delaying-- don't go!
Don't go!
And of course, the
tragedy there is
there is another train trying
to get into your station,
would get into your
station, but can't
get into your station
because of this one
that doesn't even belong
there anymore is delayed.
>> It's still in your station.
>> So this idea of detaching,
it's a hard area to detach
from.
It's a very difficult
area to say,
"Dear God, it's in
your hands, whatever."
But if we can, it's like
any other area of life.
If you can give it over
to the flow of something
with a greater
wisdom and a greater
kind of cosmic intelligence
than your ego thinking,
we can have it all.
>> But I've heard men say,
"I know she's going to come
around, because I'm just
waiting for her to grow up."
Should we wait?
>> I think every
case is different.
And I can't tell a person
what they're supposed to do.
You can't judge those
things from the outside.
I think God tells
us those things.
Sometimes the lesson in a
relationship is hang in there.
Sometimes the lesson
in a relationship
is learn to let go.
Every relationship is different.
That's why it's so
important to meditate.
important to pray
so that we can get clear about
what a higher wisdom is really
saying to us.
>> If you could sum up
your whole book, Marianne,
in about a minute, and there's
somebody out there who needs
some help right now,
what would you say?
What is this book about?
>> I think that there
is an inner room,
kind of like a romantic chakra.
It's a temple.
It's like a romantic temple.
And I think it dwells in all
of us, at least in potential.
And I think it's like any
other temple space inside.
If we knock on it, then
the door will open.
And we can go in there.
And if we go in there
and allow the love that
is in there enter
into us and renew us,
then sooner than
we have any idea,
someone will join us in there.
>> Do you think if you
really want somebody,
you can have them?
>> Well, not necessarily the
person you think you want?
>> Not person, but a person.
>> Yes.
I think that if love, if
intimate love and partnership,
with a beloved is the
highest growth for our souls,
then it's reaching out for
us and the real issue becomes
how receptive we are.
>> And can we tell that by
how strong our longing is?
>> I don't know.
I think that our longing
for another person
as "The Course of
Miracles" says it's
a shadow of our longing for God.
I think it's part of
our journey to God.
I think it's a great mystery.
But I think that if we embark on
a deeper conversation with God
about it, not just, "Dear
God, send me somebody,"
but "Dear God, show
me what it means
to be on a sacred
romantic adventure,"
then I think the answers
come more than we know.
>> Well, you are a
marvelous answer.
>> Thank you.
>> We've been privileged today--
>> --to be talking to Marianne
Williamson about her book
"Enchanted Love: The
Mystical Power of Intimate
Relationships."
It's a wonderful book.
And we bring you only the
most important messengers
in publishing
today on this show.
This is an author I think you
will agree who cares about you.
Keep coming back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]